AIVenture Project Blog Post (#5)
directus-community/guest-authoring: ai-in-directus-flows/index.md

---
title: 'No code AI with Directus Flows'
description: ‘Learn how AIVenture used Directus Flows to create a low-code, AI based, text-adventure game engine in the style of the classic Zork games.’
author:
  name: 'Craig Harman'
  avatar\_file\_name: 'craig.jpg'
---

## You are standing in an open field…

[AIVenture][1] hark's back to the days of text-based adventure games such at [Zork][2] and [Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy][3] but with a modern AI twist. The game uses Directus Flows and user registration along with the [directus-extension-ai-pack][4] extension to create a low-code game engine offering players a unique story-telling experience.

The underlying application is effectively a Chat-GPT powered game engine. It uses Directus to control game logic, provide player registration, and track game state persistence. The front-end is a [Nuxt][5] application which receives player commands (in the form of text prompts) and sends them to a Directus Flow endpoint. Responses are generated by Chat-GPT using the [directus-extension-ai-pack][6] extension.

> ## On boarding players

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Registering Players
```

> So that AIVenture can store game progress across devices individual users need to be identified. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So that AIVenture can store game progress across devices, individual users need to be identified. 
```

> As Directus already has user management and authentication baked in AIVenture is able to harness the API to create users. When users sign up they are assigned a custom “player” role that gives them permissions to reach a single Directus Flow game endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Directus already has user management and authentication baked in, AIVenture is able to harness the API to create users. When users sign up, they are assigned a custom “player” role that gives them permissions to reach a single Directus Flow game endpoint.
```

> To avoid the game sign-up process being spammed with fake email addresses we require that a player’s email address is validated. Although there isn’t specifically an email validation workflow available in Directus, there is a [user invite procedure][7]. Behind the scenes when a player signs up to AIVenture we are actually generating a user **invite** in Directus. This does not give access to the game until it has been accepted via a link in the player’s email - which is effectively the same as an email validation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid the game sign-up process being spammed with fake email addresses, we require that a player’s email address is validated. Although there isn’t specifically an email validation workflow available in Directus, there is a [user invite procedure][7]. Behind the scenes when a player signs up to AIVenture we are actually generating a user **invite** in Directus. This does not give access to the game until it has been accepted via a link in the player’s email - which is effectively the same as an email validation process.
```

> The emails sent to players are customised by directly editing the [liquid][8] template [files][9] provided by Directus. Only upon successfully completing the invite procedure does a user get provided with an active Directus user account and can hence access the game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The emails sent to players are customised by directly editing the [liquid][8] template [files][9] provided by Directus. Once a user accepts their invite, they are provided with an active Directus user account and can access the game.
```

## Tracking OpenAI Tokens

> AIVenture uses the [directus-extension-ai-pack][10] extension to interact with Open AI’s **Chat Completion API** within Directus Flows. The extension requires minimal setup before allowing chat prompts to be sent to Open AI and have responses returned for further processing in our flows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AIVenture uses the [directus-extension-ai-pack][10] extension to interact with OpenAI’s **Chat Completion API** within Directus Flows. The extension requires minimal setup before allowing chat prompts to be sent to OpenAI and have responses returned for further processing in our flows.
```

> Chat GPT charges the API account owner for usage via [tokens][11] allocated by the length of your prompts and the resulting responses. In order to keep Open AI bills under control AIVenture allocates daily, per user, token limits on a player’s progress through the game as well as a hard limit that indicates the game needs to reach a conclusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAI charges the API account owner for usage via [tokens][11] allocated by the length of your prompts and the resulting responses. In order to keep OpenAI bills under control, AIVenture allocates daily, per user, token limits on a player’s progress through the game as well as a hard limit that indicates the game needs to reach a conclusion.
```

> The Chat GPT API returns a token count with each response, however this was originally not passed on by [directus-extension-ai-pack][12]. Luckily, the extension is open-source and [a small PR later][13] we were able to access the Chat GPT usage data in our flow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ChatGPT API returns a token count with each response, however this was originally not passed on by [directus-extension-ai-pack][12]. Luckily, the extension is open-source and [a small PR later][13] we were able to access the Chat GPT usage data in our flow:
```

```json
"usage": {
    "completion_tokens": 17,
    "prompt_tokens": 57,
    "total_tokens": 74
} 
```

Each prompt/response combination is stored in a Directus collection and various query filters and aggregators are used to provide the game engine with the total number of tokens used by a player in a day and the total tokens used for the current game.

> If the player reaches their daily limit, no more Chat GPT prompts can be sent to the API and the game will prompt you to wait until tomorrow before being able to progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the player reaches their daily limit, no more prompts can be sent to the API and the game will prompt them to wait until tomorrow before being able to progress.
```

> Once the total game token limit is reached the prompt sent to Chat GPT is modified such that the next responses will include a satisfying conclusion to the game currently in progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the total game token limit is reached, the prompt sent to ChatGPT is modified such that the next responses will include a satisfying conclusion to the game currently in progress.
```

> ## The game engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The Game Engine
```

The [AIVenture][14] game engine is responsible for:

1. Providing initial context to Chat GPT (eg. “You are a text adventure game writer…”).
2. Generating an introduction (eg. “You are standing in an open field…”).
3. Responding to player prompts in a way compliant with any game rules and the initial context.
4. Managing Chat GPT interactions including token counts and unexpected responses.
5. Providing a satisfactory end game state.
6. State management for games in progress.

> In AIVenture all this logic is represented in Directus Flows. However with the large number of operations required we need to plan our flow architecture carefully to avoid unnecessarily complicating our game engine flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In AIVenture, all of this logic is represented in Directus Flows. However with the large number of operations required we need to plan our flow architecture carefully to avoid unnecessarily complicating our game engine flow.
```

> ### Managing complex flows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Managing Complex Flows
```

Creating a game engine in Directus Flows has the potential to become excessively large and unmaintainable very quickly without some strict architectural decisions. 

> We keep flows as small and functionally isolated components. Think of these flows as you would Classes in your application. We then have a central or main flow that triggers our sub-flows. This is a powerful and important architecture for our game engine design as it allows us to compartmentalise logic, keeping our main flow clean and readable and making testing easier. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We keep flows as small and functionally-isolated components. Think of these flows as you would Classes in your application. A central (or 'main') flow triggers our sub-flows. This is a powerful and important architecture for our game engine design as it allows us to compartmentalize logic, keeping our main flow clean and readable and making testing easier. 
```

Let’s see what this looks like in Directus. First, we set up a flow called “SubCommand”. Our one important configuration for this flow is to select “Another flow” as the trigger set up - this will allow us to trigger this sub flow from within our parent and receive the resulting data. All our flow logic for our subcommand can now be added, being sure to return the required data.

![Selecting “Another Flow” as our Trigger][image-1]

> Next we want to add our master or parent flow. This will be called from our frontend so should have a “Webhook” trigger - for ease of testing in the browser, let’s use the GET method. Then we add a new operation to our flow of type “Trigger Flow” and select our “SubCommand” flow from above. Our payload should include the data from the subcommand, ie. `{{ $last }}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we want to add our central flow. This will be called from the frontend so should have a “Webhook” trigger. For ease of testing in the browser, use the GET method. Then, we add a new operation to our flow of type “Trigger Flow” and select our “SubCommand” flow from above. Our payload should include the data from the subcommand, ie. `{{ $last }}`.
```

Standardizing earlier language, but also `master` is a term we generally keep our of projects and writing where possible.

Author: Understood. Perhaps "main" instead of "central" as this flow is really the top most piece of logic. Thoughts?

Reviewer: Yup works for me. It was more the rejection of the word master than a promotion of central. Whatever works for you.

![Main parent flow triggering a sub-command][image-2]

If we make a request to our main flow we will see a response from our subcommand:

```json
{
  "parent": "Message generated in parent flow.",
  "subcommand": "This message is from subcommand"
}
```

> In AIVenture we use this sub-flow technique extensively wherever we feel we have a self-contained functional component such as interacting with Chat GPT API, calculating token usage or processing user input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In AIVenture, we use this sub-flow technique extensively wherever we feel we have a self-contained functional component such as interacting with Chat GPT API, calculating token usage or processing user input.
```

> ### No turning back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Branching Logic With Only Two Paths
```
